# Online Investing Hacks

Standardized data – income and expense items are placed into standard categories
Normalized data – impact of nonrecurring gains and losses removed

## Free spreadsheets

Bob’Adams’s (free) Excel spreadsheet
Jax Works (http://www.jaxworks.com/download/htm) “Small Business Spreadsheet Factory” (Financial Comparison Analysis link)
Technamental Analysis (http://finance.groups.yahoo.com/group/TSSW=Excel)

## Paid spreadsheets

Spredgar (http://www.spredgar.com)
ValueSheet (http://www.valuesheet.com)
Valuesoft (http://www.sherlockinvesting.com)

## Real Estate Investment Trusts (REITs)

Reits invest in different types of real estate, in which the earnings of the REIT often have more to do with rental and occupancy rates than the interest rates that affect stocks and bonds. REITs are pooled asset vehicles similar to mutual funds, but they invest in properties rather than stocks and bonds. REITs are required by tax law to distributed 90 percent of their taxable income to shareholders.

## Types of REITs:

1. Equity REITs – own and operate income-producing properties
2. Mortgage REITs – Lend money directly to real estate owners or purchase real estate loans. They also invest in mortgage-backed securities
3. Hybrid REITs – combine the features of equity and mortgage REITs

### Analyzing REITs

Real estate properties, unlike depreciable equipment, tends to rise in value over time. Consequently, depreciation should not be deducted when determining REIT performance. Instead, the following are often used:

1. Funds from operations (FFO) – (a.k.a. Income from Continuing Operations) excludes property depreciation and gains or losses from sales of property (use P/FFO instead of P/E)
   FFO = Income before gain on sale of real estate + Depreciation + Amortization
2. Adjusted funds from operations (AFFO) – measures the cash flows generated by a REIT (requires accounting assumptions)

### Other REIT Investment Vehicles

- REIT mutual funds
- Closed-end REIT funds
- REIT index funds

http://www.nareit.com # “Investor’s Guide to REITs.pdf”

## Banks

Money-center banks, investment banks, regional banks, savings banks, savings and loans

Revenue = Net interest income + Tax Equiv. Adjustment + Non Interest Income – Loan Loss Provision
Net interest margin = interest charged on loans – interest paid on deposits
Revenue ratio: Interest/Non interest ratio = Interest income / Revenue

Loan loss provision – money banks are required to set aside to cover potential loan losses; is deducted from the net interest income (much like sales returns and allowances for a manufacturing company)

Loan loss reserve – the amount of the loan loss provision on the income statement that remains unused and is transferred to the balance sheet as loan loss reserve; any loan loss provision exceeding the loan loss reserve balance is a deficit to the loan loss reserve account on the balance sheet

Loan loss provision ratio – compares the loan loss provision to the bank’s total loans

Non-performing assets ratio – loans in which the interest is past due 90 days or more, that are not being paid on schedule, or that are being paid at a reduced rate divided by the total loans

When the loan loss provision ratio is too low, a bank might have to take a charge against earnings to bolster the provision.

The red flag in loan losses is a bank that keeps taking charges against earnings to shore up continually deteriorating loan loss provisions.

Because banks carry so much debt, ROE isn’t a good measure of profitability. The best measure of bank profitability and quality of management is ROA.

## Qualitative Analysis

- Business summary – describe the company’s business (how does it make money; does it have one or multiple diversified product lines; is it regional, national, or global in scope?
- Business outlook – positive and negative influences on the company’s business, such as acquisitions, divestitures, cost control, cost increases, management changes, successful or dismal product strategies, the economy, currency exchange rates, and competition
- Business strategy – how the business grows; from acquisitions, increased market share, higher volume, higher profit margins, building stores, developing new products, or other approaches

## SWOT analysis

SWOT analysis is a business management technique for evaluating:

- Strengths and weaknesses (inward look at product lines, management, human resources, infrastructure)
- Opportunities, and threats (outward look at demographics and consumer demand, competitors or technological changes)

## Quantitative Analysis

- Growth rates (trends, both cyclical and secular)
- Ratios (common size statements)
- Valuation (NPV, relative valuation, etc.)

Document your reasons for selling a stock:

- Overpriced asset
- Deteriorating fundamentals
- Improve portfolio diversification

“Volume precedes price” is the Wall Street saying, and it often does. When volume increases, the trend of the market or a stock usually continues in the same direction. Declining volume often signals and upcoming trend reversal.

## Accumulation

- Price goes up and volume increases well above its average – the stock is accumulated
- Price goes up but volume decreases – the stock is about to peak and drop to a more reasonable price level
  Distribution
- Price heads south and volume is above average – significant selling or distribution is occurring
- Price drops and volume is below average – the stock is about to level off or rise to a more reasonable level

StockCharts.com uses a 60-day exponential average, EMA(60), to show whether volume change in a day or other period is above, below, or at its current average.

Traders prefer volume-based indicators for confirmation of price-based signals.

Indicators – moving averages, relative strength index

## Moving Averages

- Simple – arithmetic mean
- Weighted
- Exponential

A stock price that rises above its moving average is a buy signal and a price that drops below the moving average a sell signal.

Moving averages are lagging indicators, which means they tell you what has happened after the fact.

MACD (Moving Average Convergence/Divergence) shows the relationship between a 26-day and 12-day exponential moving average. MACD is often shown as a histogram.
Use MACD in several ways:

- Crossovers
   The MACD generates a sell or buy signal when it falls below or above its signal line (MACD of 1)
- Overbought/oversold
   MACD increases when the 12-day moving average grows faster than the 26-day moving average
- Divergences
   The MACD heading in a different direction than the price can also predict price movements

The Relative Strength Index (RSI) is an oscillator. It ranges from 0 to 100. If the price reaches a new high but the RSI does not, that divergence indicates that the price is about to reverse and start heading back down. RSI values above 70 indicate an overbought condition, while values below 30 suggest an oversold condition.

All or none (AON) order – by checking the AON box on the order, you instruct your brokerage to forget the order if it can’t fill it all at once. The AON option also prevents your brokerage from placing multiple trades to fill your complete order, which would result in the payment of multiple commissions.

With limit orders, your brokerage might give you an option to specify how long it should try to fill the order. The two timeframes most frequently used are day orders and orders that are good ‘till cancelled (GTC). A day order is cancelled if it can’t be filled before the next market close. In theory, GTC orders remain open until they are filled or cancelled by the customer. In practice, many firms automatically terminate GTC orders after 30 or 90 days (check your brokerage firm).

Brokerage firms sometimes offer fill or kill options on limit orders. If your trade can’t be executed immediately at your limit price (either in full or in part, depending on whether you selected AON) then your order is cancelled.

A brokerage might offer a do not reduce (DNR) option on limit orders. This only affects stocks that pay dividends.

Your sell prices are reduced as dividends are paid, leading to unintended sales in your account.

Some brokerage firms offer after-hour trading that enables you to buy and sell stocks, and possibly avert disaster – as long as you understand the risks.

In the U.S., the stock markets and exchanges NYSE, AMEX, Nasdaq) are open from 9:30 a.m. to 4 p.m. eastern standard time.

## After-hours trading

- Trade stocks in the hours before and after the market is open.

Electronic Communications Networks (ECNs), have long been used by institutional investors to buy and sell stocks amongst themselves without using the services (and costs) of a broker.

Today, most major online brokerages offer extended hours trading through arrangements with one of the two leading ECNS, Archipelago or INET (formed by the merger of Island and Instinet).
Different hours of operations, opening as early as 7:30 a.m. and closing as late as 8:00 p.m. eastern standard time.
https://finance.yahoo.com (look for After Hours link above the price information for any given stock page)

To place an after-hours trade, log in to your brokerage firm’s website, surf to the trading section, and look for a link to extended hours trading, which is almost always separate from the order screen for regular trading.

### Drawbacks to After-Hours Trading

- ECNs function by crossing trades – matching buyers to sellers – and therefore lack the liquidity controls that help maintain an orderly market during regular hours. On stock exchanges, a specialist (either human or computer) is assigned to every stock, acting as a traffic cop to keep the flow of buys and sells moving smoothly. If there is a temporary shortage of buyers or sellers in a stock, its specialist will jump in and trade from its own account, assuring liquidity and a certain amount of price stability throughout the day. On Nasdaq, market makers serve a similar role. Without these specialists, a shortage of sellers can dramatically increase the price of a stock, whereas a shortage of buyers can decrease the price. No specialists or market makers serve the same role on ECNs. As a result, the spreads – the difference between a stock’s ask and bid prices – can be quite large. Prices can widely fluctuate from minute to minute. The stock might fall in price in after-hours markets due to panic selling and then recover when the market opens in the morning.

http://www.sec.gov/investor/pubs/afterhours.htm
Archipelago ECN: http://www.archipelago.com
INET ECN: http://www.island.com

It costs money to run a mutual fund. Fund expenses directly impact your investment returns because they’re deducted from your investment in a fund. You pay even more if you use a financial advisor or broker to purchase fund shares.

The commissions that fund pay to brokers for trades take a further bite out of results – one to two percent a year. Unfortunately, fund companies don’t deduct brokerage commissions when they calculate the fund performance figures that they publish, even though they deduct them from your fund assets.

Some extraordinary fund managers produce such strong results that they overcome the drag of the higher fees they charge for their expertise.

Expense ratios range from as low as 0.18 percent of invested assets to as high as 3 percent, depending on the type of fund, the frugality of the fund family, and individual fund characteristics.

Mutual funds pass operating costs, such as administrative expense, fund management expense, marketing and distribution fees, and brokerage commissions, to their shareholders. However, only the administrative expenses, management costs and marketing, and distribution fees are incorporated into a fund’s published expense ratio. Marketing fees are identified separately and the costs of brokerage commissions are typically hard to find.

## Administrative costs

- Back-office expenses, such as customer service, bookkeeping, audit of fund accounts, and the processing of fund share purchase and redemption orders
  Fund portfolio management costs
- Includes the salaries of fund managers and analysts, the research services used, costs of running a trading desk (minus the brokerage commission)
  Marketing and distribution expenses
- Incurred by all funds, but not all funds charge a separate fee (known as a 12b-1 fee) to cover them. If the 12b-1 fee is more than 0.25 percent, funds have to publish it separately from the expense ratio. Do you really want to pay a fund company to find new investors so that it can earn more fees?
  Brokerage commissions
- Actual costs that a fund company pays a brokerage firm to buy and sell securities. These costs will reduce you return below the published fund return.

Sales charges or loads are the fees that investors pay when they purchase fund shares through a broker or financial planner Loads are the price of obtaining so-called financial advice, which is a far more expensive education than reading this book. These charges cut into your investment above and beyond regular fund expenses.

### Three types of Sales loads:

1. Front-end load – also known as Class A shares. Investors pay a cut out of their initial investment, reducing the amount of money they have to invest. Brokers and advisers receive that percentage as a sales commission. If you’re going to invest for the long term and really want to buy shares in a load fund, studies show that paying a front-end load is the least expensive of all the sales charges.
2. Back-end loads – Also known as Class B shares. You pay a deferred load when you sell fund shares. The actual percentage you pay depends on how long you own fund shares, because back-end loads usually follow a sliding scale that zeros out at some point, usually between five and seven years. After the load zeros out, these funds usually convert to Class A shares, which carry a lower expense ratio.
3. Level loads – Also known as Class C shares. You pay no front-end or back-end load, but pay an ongoing 12b-1 fee that can be as high as one percent a year to pay the broker’s or advisor’s ongoing commission. For long-term investors, level loads hurt the most because they recur as long as you own fund shares.

Look for Corporate governance reforms that include, among others:

- Ending all soft-dollar deals with brokerage firms
- Requiring that the chairman of the board be chosen from the independent directors

### Warning Signs for Mutual Funds

- Departing manager
- Proposed fund merger
- Changing investment philosophy
- Significant increases in assets
   As assets increase, the fund company might make more money through fund expenses, but the fund managers might have to compromise the investing style that led to such great gains in the first place. … “vulnerable to asset bloat.” Mutual funds that close to new accounts help protect fund performance and existing shareholders.
- Increasing or new fees
- An increasing turnover rate
   …impair fund tax efficiency and lead to higher tax bills and brokerage costs
- Turmoil
   Fund family turmoil, merger, acquisition, or other loss of focus can distract managers from their investing duties and result in lower returns.

## Framework for Portfolio Management

1. Identify your financial goals: how much money you need and when.
2. Identify your tolerance for risk
3. Identify the financial strategy you plan to use to achieve your goals: how much you will save and how often; how you will allocate your money between different types of investments.
4. Determine which investment philosophies (fundamental analysis, technical analysis, a bit of both) you will use.
5. Document the investment rules you plan to use: how much you are willing to risk; guidelines for evaluating investments; rules for when you will buy or sell.
6. Initiate your plan by creating accounts if necessary and setting up automatic deposit programs.
7. Set up reminders and alerts to notify you of important events in your holdings, such as when rules are breached and when good buy and sell prices are reached.
8. Evaluate the events that occur to determine whether they warrant action (is a buy really a buy, is a sell really a sell).
9. Regularly (monthly or quarterly) review your individual investments to see if they are meeting your expectations.
10. Regularly (annually) review your overall strategy and adjust it as needed. You might adjust your allocation or reduce the risk you assume as you approach retirement.

Cash, U.S. stocks, foreign stocks, bonds, other
Value, core, growth
Large cap, mid cap, small cap
Stock sector:

- Information
  - Software, hardware, media, telecommunications
- Service
  - Healthcare, consumer services, business services, financial services
- Manufacturing
  - Consumer goods, industrial materials, energy, utilities
- Other

Stock type:

- High yield, distressed, hard assets, cyclical, slow growth, classic growth, aggressive growth, speculative growth, other

World region

- U.S., Brazil, China, etc.

A typical portfolio for a long-term investor contains between 10 and 25 stocks. Of these, about two-thirds end their fiscal year on the last day of the calendar year. This means that the bulk of your defense is played in four months of the year – March, April, July, and October. Retailers end their fiscal years typically at the end of January so that they can include the holiday activity in their annual reports. For these companies, you play defense in April, May, August, and November.

The SEC gives companies extra time to report their fourth quarter and annual data.

Organize the companies you own by their fiscal year end dates and schedule your defensive work.

Earnings Reporting Schedule
Companies must report financial results to the SEC within 45 days of the end of each quarter except the fourth quarter, for which the SEC generously allows them 90 days to report full year performance.

Bonds vs. Bond funds

- Commissions on single-, new-issue bonds are lower than mutual fund expenses.
- Bond Fund advantages – can invest small amounts of money, set up regular contribution schedules, reinvest in the fund, and benefit from diversification

Array formulas apply the function iteratively for each cell in the formula array.
5-year compound average return = {PRODUCT(1+B2:B6)^(1/5)-1
